Introduction

Motivation for the project.

A common application in scientific computing is use of the computer
for tabulation of data and results obtained by experiment. Such
results are often presented in the form of a graph. Showing data by
using a graph has two major advantages: it is easy to see
relationships linking experimental quantities, and any experimental
anomalies show up more easily. Therefore the aim of this project is to
create a tool which displays arbitrary or experimental data in the
form of a graph. Plotting the graph and manipulating the data should
be interactive, easy to do, and should happen in real time on the
screen for maximum understanding. Having plotted a graph of
experimental data, one may wish to find the formal relationship
linking the graph points, or to compare the results obtained against a
standard known curve. It is also desirable to be able to identify
salient features of the graph, and to know such things as the area
contained under the graph. Therefore the project should provide
support for plotting graphs from data in a natural way, and analysing
the graph in certain ways mathematically.

Computer Science areas covered and technical background.

The project addresses three main areas of Computer Science: user
interface design, numerical analysis, and a limited amount of
graphics. The user interface must support the activity of plotting and
analysing graphs. Typically the sorts of analysis one wishes to
perform on graphs includes curve fitting, interpolation and
extrapolation of data points, and finding the gradient or the area
underneath the graph. Various numerical analysis techniques can be
usefully applied to achieve these aims. Obviously the area of computer
graphics, and specifically the use of a coordinate graphics system, is
involved in actually producing a graph to be displayed on screen.

Related programs.

Gnuplot is a well known command-line driven interactive plotting
program which runs under unix. It concentrates on plotting functions,
but also has support for plotting data to be compared to given
functions. Gnuplot will plots 2D and 3D graphs, and functions can be
built from C operators and library functions. It also has support for
user defined functions and constants. It has several features and
options such as axis labelling and scaling, and support for file
operations. All computations performed by Gnuplot are done in the
complex domain.

Graph(1) is a standard unix command which when given no options will
read in pairs of numbers from stdin, treating them as abscissae and
ordinates for a cartesian graph. It has no support for plotting
functions but only handles data, and joins plotted points on the graph
with straight lines. There is some support for different options: the
axes can be logarithmic, a grid can be overlayed on the graph, and
individual points may be labelled.

Reduce is a system for carrying out algebraic manipulations. It
addresses a different area from this project but is worth considering
so as to define what this project does not attempt to do. This project
concentrates on numerical aspects and has no support for symbolic
algebraic operations such as symbolic differentiation.




